Dear President's Leaguers:

The following proposal arises out of my observations of the league as a player and 
coordinator as well as many conversations I have had with current and former players
about points, challenges, rules, etc.

It is not yet a formal proposal and has not been approved by anyone (such as the Board)
except me.

It is a great league, but let's make it better!

------------------

The following proposed changes to the format for President's League are intended to address the following issues:

-- the league is limited to 18 teams, and employs a challenge round system to fill the last two spots. 
   Many more teams would like to participate if there was room in the league (about 25 teams played or challenged this year)

-- the ranking system has flaws (see below) and the challenge round system has flaws (scheduling, finding ice time, etc)

-- the league size limit places enormous importance on the player-point assignment algorithm, and can lead to 
   team selection based on point status rather than merit.

-- league entry into the league is based on previous performance in the league, which is a barrier to entry for new teams.

-- player points are assigned based solely on last year's performance, unfairly penalizing absences from the league.

-- the season is not long enough to run 3 full round robins (even when Christmas/New Years falls away from Tuesday).
   This leads to inequities in scheduling the final partial "round robin"

I would like to propose
(a) increasing the size of the league
(b) improving the league entry / challenge system
(c) improving the formula for allocating player points.


Formula for allocating player points.
-------------------------------------

The current formula for allocating player points would remain, with the following modifications:

-- each player will be assigned the larger of the following points:
 
  - "Normal Points": the team points assigned to the player based on the prior year team placement.
    Recall that the last placed team players are assigned 10 points.

  - "Baseline Points": three points for each President's League season played in the past 7 years, 
    up to a maximum of 15 points.

-- at the start of the season, teams are ranked by summing player points. The "team ranking point total" 
will be calculated by adding the four player totals if four players are registered on the team, or the
highest four player totals if five players are registered on the team.


League Brackets and Team Entry 
------------------------------

Teams ranked 1 to 7 are seeded into the first round of A bracket.

Teams ranked 8 to 14 are seeded into the first round of B bracket. 

All other teams are placed in the C bracket.


A and B bracket format
----------------------

A full round robin of 7 teams requires 21 games: 3 games each week
over 7 weeks. Each team will have one bye during each round.

The A and B bracket will each play three full round robins, and will
then enter a 2-game 16-team playoff (same format as currently). This
requires 23 games: any extra games will be played after the third
round robin and before the playoffs.


C bracket format
----------------

Concept One:
  - all challenge rounds are eliminated.
  - C bracket rounds will be 7 weeks (to match A/B bracket rounds) and will either be a full-round robin (7 teams)
    or two pools (8 or more teams)

Concept Two:
  - all challenge rounds are eliminated.
  - first first round will be 7 weeks, and 7 teams will remain after the first round
  - the second and third round will be full-round robins co-inciding with the A and B brackets.

  Concept Three:
   -a pre-season challenge round will be played amongst teams 15+ to pick seven teams
   -the C bracket will then play three full round robins 


When will C bracket games occur?
--------------------------------    
First, note that there are only 6 A/B games each week, so two sheets are available on Tuesdays for C bracket games.

There are at least three methods for accommodating the C bracket:

Method One:  Fewer games. All games would occur on Tuesday, but a full round robin would not be possible in 7 weeks on 2 sheets.

Method Two: Shorter games. We could play 3 games on one sheet on a Tuesday if the games were timed with a hard maximum of 85 minutes.
   Example: Game 1: 6pm start. Game 2: 7:30pm start. Game 3: 9pm start.

Method Three: One sheet a week on a different night. This would require finding ice time on a different night (possibly not always the same night.) 


Bracket Interchange
-------------------

At the end of each round, the bottom two A bracket teams swap places with the top two B bracket teams. 

The bottom two B bracket teams swap places with the top two C bracket teams. If the C bracket round was a "single pool", then the top two teams enter into B. If the C bracket round was a "double pool", then the top team from each pool enters into B.

Game Points
-----------
Currently, A games are worth 5 (win) and 1 (loss). B games are worth 3 (win) and 0 (loss).

If a C bracket is introduced, I propose we double the A and B bracket win numbers (to avoid fractions)
and assign points as follows:

A: 10 win, 2 loss
B:  6 win, 1 loss
C:  3 win, 0 loss

Note: if fewer C bracket games are played due to league size (i.e. more than 21 teams / 7 in C), 
it might make sense to make B and C bracket games equal in point values.

I am eager to get feedback on this proposal, in person or via email. 

Tonight I have the late game, and would be happy to talk about this and any other suggestions you might have 
before or after my game.

All the best,
Jeff Carruthers

[Please to not reply all to this email. It has about 100 recipients (all current players plus the sub list)]
