Broomstones Curling Club
========================


President’s League 2013-2014
----------------------------

Rules and Regulations
---------------------

League Philosophy
-----------------
The President’s League is Broomstones’ most competitive league.  The
winner of the league will win the President’s trophy, which is the
defacto Broomstones club championship. Teams in this league are
committed to improving their individual and team skills. Games are
played quickly, fairly and always with a high degree of
sportsmanship. 

Scheduling
----------
The President’s League is played at Broomstones on Tuesday
nights. There are draws at 6:15pm and 8:30pm.  All teams should expect
to play at both times during the season at roughly equal frequency.


Teams and Entry
---------------

Teams will have an “open” format – any combination of men or women.
All team members must be full dues paying members of Broomstones
Curling Club.  All teams with four registered dues paying Broomstones
members will be considered for entry into the league if their
application is received by the deadline for league entries.

If more entries are received than can be accommodated into the draw
then teams will be selected as follows:

Teams will be ranked based on points established by the final
standings in the President’s League the prior year Ranking points will
be assigned to each individual based on their ranking points from the
prior year.  Ranking points will be counted for the four position
players but not for fifths or alternates.  Team rosters as of the end
of league registration will be used for the purpose of calculating the
team points; no changes made after the league registration deadline
will be included in the calculations.  Teams that are ranked beyond
the 18th position are considered the challenging teams.  Playoff games
will be held between the two lowest ranked teams (typically ranked 17
and 18) and the challenging teams to determine which teams get into
the league at the start of the season


Brackets and Interchange
------------------------

The President’s League will contain 18 teams divided into 2
brackets. The top 9 ranked teams will be grouped into the “A” bracket,
while the lower 9 ranked teams will grouped into the “B” bracket.

League play will consist of round robins in which each team in a
bracket plays every other team in the bracket once.  At the end of
each round robin, the two teams with the lowest standings in each
bracket for that round robin will be moved into the next lower
bracket.  The two teams with the highest standing for that round robin
will have the right to move up to the next highest bracket.  If those
teams choose not to exercise their right to move up, the option will
pass in progression to the team in the next position. Also, at the end
of each president’s League round-robin, the lowest ranked team in the
President’s League may be challenged.



Tie Breakers

Standings for each round robin will be based on won-loss records for
that round robin. Ties will be resolved by considering the following
items in order:

* Won-loss record for the round-robin
* Head-to-head record for the round-robin
* Standings Point total for the season
* Head-to-head record for the season
* Lowest number of forfeited games for the season
* Shoot-out*
* Coin toss 


Standing after the last round robin will determine seedings into the
playoffs. Ties will be resolved by considering the following items in
order:

* Standings point total for the season. 
Head-to-head record for the season. (Note: For ties involving three or more teams, sub-record of games between the teams will be used only if the teams have played the same number of games against each other or if the standings are decisive for uneven number of games.)

* Points total in the most recent round-robin.
* Lowest number of forfeited games for the season
* Shoot-out 
* Coin toss 


At the start of the season, placement into the “A” and “B” brackets,
and determination of the two last-placed teams subject to challenges,
is determined using team ranking points.  Ties between teams will be
resolved by considering the following items in order:

* Skips points
* Vice Points
* Second Points
* Coin toss 

*Conducted early in the season


Challenge Provision and Playoffs

At the start of the season or at the end of any round robin, any
qualified team may challenge for entry into the league.

At the start of the league season, the bottom-ranked two teams will
play a play-off game.  The losing team plays against the challenging
team.

The challenge will consist of a single game played at a pre-arranged
time.  If the challenging team wins this game, that team will take the
place of the losing team in the league. (The losing team may itself
challenge back into the league after the next round robin.) If more
than one team challenges into the league, then a playoff will be
arranged to determine which single team will play the lowest standing
league team. 

Rules of Play

The league will follow all USCA rules including the 4 rock “free guard
zone” rule.  All games will be 8 ends. Ties will be decided by a full
extra end.

All President’s League games will start at either 6:15 or 8:30. A team
responsible for delaying the start of the game (fewer than 3 players
present) must concede one point and one end for each 10 minutes that
the game is delayed and also forfeit last rock on the first end
played. The game will be forfeited after 30 minutes.

If both teams are equally responsible for delaying the start of a
game, a blank end will be scored for each 10 minutes that the game is
delayed and the game will be scored as a default for both teams if
both teams cannot start the game within 30 minutes of the scheduled
start time.

Speedy play is mandated throughout all games.  If a team is judged to
be consistently slow, such team may be asked to leave the league.


Substitution

At least two team members must be present to begin any game.  Up to
two players for any game may be substitutes.  An effort should be made
to find substitutes from outside of the league, but substitutes from
within the league are permissible.  Substitutes must play at either
the Lead or Second position.


Postponements and Forfeits

All games should be played on the dates and times scheduled.  However,
if both teams agree a game may be played at another time within 10
days of the original date and before the end of the round robin.


Point System

A point system will be used to qualify teams for the play-offs.  Any
game played in the “A” bracket will be worth 1 point regardless of win
or loss.  A win in an “A” bracket game will be worth 4 points.  A win
in a “B” bracket game will be worth 3 points.


Play-offs

At the end of the last round robin the top four teams in season points
will compete for the President’s trophy.  The next four teams will
compete for the Moore Trophy.  Each of the remaining groups of four
will compete for consolation events and to finalize standings for the
next season.   In all playoff games, the higher seeded team gets
choice of hammer or color.


Ranking Points

Each team will be awarded their points based in their final standing
at the end of the season.  The last place team will receive ten
points.  Every subsequent team will receive 1.10 times (this number
comes from the relative difference between 9th and 10th place – the
midpoint) as many points as the next lower team:

Standing
Points
18 10.0
17 11
16 12.1
15 13.3
14 14.6
13 16.1
12 17.7
11 19.5
10 21.4
9 23.6
8 25.9
7 28.5
6 31.4
5 34.5
4 38
3 41.8
2 45.9
1 50.5

A team must have won at least one game in order to qualify to receive points.

It may be the case that there are more than 18 teams who qualify for
points since some teams may play a partial season due to challenge
game losses or challenging into the league part-way through the
season.  The starting value of 10 points will be assigned to the team
with the worst record, and every subsequent team will receive 1.10
times as many points.  For 19 teams:


 
Standing
Points
19 10.0
18 11
17 12.1
16 13.3
15 14.6
14 16.1
13 17.7
12 19.5
11 21.4
10 23.6
9 25.9
8 28.5
7 31.4
6 34.5
5 38
4 41.8
3 45.9
2 50.5
1 55.6


Team Members

The four team members who played the most games over the course of the
season will receive season points.  This applies to both regular team
members and fifths.  A fifth who plays more games than a mostly absent
regular team member will receive points while the absent team member
will not.    Fifths must be declared prior to the 10th-from-last game
of the season.  Team members cannot be changed within 10 games from
the end of the season. 

Playoff for team entry

The league will be capped at 18 teams to insure that competitive teams
do not have byes more than once every nine weeks. Teams will be ranked
for a playoff based on team points.  Team rosters as of the end of
league registration will be used for the purpose of calculating team
points; no changes made after the league registration deadline will be
included in the calculations.

No team will be eliminated from the league without the opportunity for a game on the ice. Playoffs will be structured as follows:
   
*  16 teams sign up: No playoff (16 team league)
* 17 teams sign up:  Try to find 18th team, if one can’t be found team 16 plays team 17 for last spot (16 team league)
* 18 teams sign up: No playoff (18 team league)
* 19 teams sign up: “3 to make 2” playoff – 17 plays 18 winner in, loser plays 19 for last spot
* 20 teams sign up: “4 to make 2” page-style playoff – 17 plays 18 winner in, 19 plays 20 loser out, Loser (17 v 18) plays Winner (19 v 20) winner gets last spot
* 21 teams sign up: “5 to make 2” see below
* 22 teams sign up: “6 to make 2”  format to be determined based on ice availability

Note: in the event that teams cannot be ranked because points are tied
or teams have all players with 0 points, straws will be drawn to rank
tied teams.

Timely Play

The league will adhere to the club timely play policy. Finish the end
that you are playing 20 minutes prior to the 2-hour mark, and play one
additional end.  In general, this means completing the end that is in
progress at 7:55pm and 10:10pm.

